Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
applied renal physiology and pharmacology in anaesthesia.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the diuretic drugs and how they are classified by their site of action.
The diuretics are drugs that increase the excretion of water by the kidney,
almost all by primarily increasing the excretion of sodium — a natriuresis — with
water following, and they are best classified by their site of action along the
nephron, which determines their potency and their effects.
Starting from the start of the tubule: the carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
such as acetazolamide, act in the proximal tubule,
inhibiting bicarbonate reabsorption; they are weak diuretics.
The osmotic diuretics, such as mannitol, act throughout the tubule,
holding water osmotically. The loop diuretics, such as furosemide,
act on the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle,
inhibiting the sodium-potassium-chloride co-transporter; they are the most powerful.
The thiazides, such as bendroflumethiazide, act on the early distal tubule,
inhibiting the sodium-chloride co-transporter; they are moderately effective.
The potassium-sparing diuretics act on the collecting duct,
either blocking the sodium channel, as amiloride does, or antagonising aldosterone,
as spironolactone does; they are weak diuretics but, unlike the others,
spare potassium.
So the diuretics are classified by their site of action:
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors in the proximal tubule, osmotic diuretics throughout,
the powerful loop diuretics on the thick ascending limb,
the thiazides on the early distal tubule,
and the potassium-sparing diuretics on the collecting duct;
the site determining the potency and the effects on potassium and other
electrolytes — a classification following the nephron.
Describe the loop diuretics in detail.
The loop diuretics, of which furosemide is the prototype,
are the most powerful diuretics, and their actions and side effects follow directly
from their site of action on the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle.
They act by inhibiting the sodium-potassium-two-chloride co-transporter on the
luminal membrane of the thick ascending limb, which normally reabsorbs these ions.
By blocking it, they prevent the reabsorption of a large fraction of the filtered
sodium, and — critically — they abolish the generation of the medullary
concentration gradient by the countercurrent multiplier,
since it is this transporter that drives it;
so they impair both the reabsorption of sodium and the ability to concentrate the
urine, producing a large diuresis.
Because so much sodium is then delivered to the distal nephron,
where some is reabsorbed in exchange for potassium and hydrogen ions,
they cause a loss of potassium and hydrogen ions,
tending to a hypokalaemia and a metabolic alkalosis;
they also increase calcium and magnesium excretion.
They are used in oedema, in heart failure,
and in acute kidney injury and hypercalcaemia.
So the loop diuretics inhibit the sodium-potassium-two-chloride co-transporter of
the thick ascending limb, powerfully reducing sodium reabsorption and abolishing
the medullary gradient to produce a large diuresis; with loss of potassium,
hydrogen ions, calcium and magnesium,
tending to hypokalaemia and alkalosis — the most powerful diuretics,
used in oedema, heart failure and other conditions.
Describe the other classes of diuretic and their particular features.
Each of the other diuretic classes has particular features and uses that follow
from its site and mechanism, worth knowing for their different effects and
indications.
The thiazides, acting on the early distal tubule to inhibit the sodium-chloride
co-transporter, are moderately effective diuretics widely used in hypertension and
in oedema; like the loop diuretics they cause potassium loss and a tendency to
alkalosis, but, distinctively, they reduce calcium excretion,
and they impair urinary dilution but not concentration.
The potassium-sparing diuretics, acting on the collecting duct — amiloride blocking
the sodium channel, and spironolactone and eplerenone antagonising the aldosterone
receptor — are weak diuretics whose value is that they spare potassium,
used to counter the potassium loss of other diuretics and,
for the aldosterone antagonists, in heart failure and hyperaldosteronism.
The carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, such as acetazolamide,
acting in the proximal tubule, are weak diuretics now used more for other effects —
in glaucoma, in altitude sickness, and to alkalinise the urine — and cause a
metabolic acidosis.
The osmotic diuretics, such as mannitol, filtered but not reabsorbed,
hold water in the tubule osmotically,
and are used to reduce intracranial and intraocular pressure and in some settings
to maintain urine flow.
So the thiazides act on the distal tubule, used in hypertension,
reducing calcium excretion; the potassium-sparing diuretics act on the collecting
duct, sparing potassium; the carbonic anhydrase inhibitors act proximally,
used in glaucoma and altitude; and the osmotic diuretics hold water osmotically,
used for raised intracranial pressure — each class with distinctive features
following its mechanism.
Describe acute kidney injury and its classification.
Acute kidney injury is a sudden decline in renal function,
with the retention of nitrogenous wastes and disturbances of fluid,
electrolyte and acid-base balance, and it is conventionally classified by the site
of the problem into pre-renal, renal and post-renal causes,
a classification that directs the diagnosis and management.
Pre-renal acute kidney injury is due to inadequate perfusion of the kidney — a
reduced renal blood flow from hypovolaemia, hypotension, low cardiac output,
or renal vascular problems; here the kidney itself is initially intact and responds
appropriately by conserving sodium and water, producing a concentrated,
sodium-poor urine, and the injury is reversible if perfusion is restored,
but becomes established intrinsic damage if prolonged.
Intrinsic, or renal, acute kidney injury is due to damage to the kidney tissue
itself — most commonly acute tubular necrosis from prolonged ischaemia or from
nephrotoxins, but also glomerular, interstitial and vascular diseases;
here the kidney cannot conserve sodium appropriately.
Post-renal acute kidney injury is due to obstruction of the urinary tract,
which is relievable. The commonest perioperative cause is pre-renal and ischaemic
acute tubular necrosis.
So acute kidney injury is a sudden decline in renal function,
classified as pre-renal — from inadequate perfusion, reversible if corrected;
intrinsic renal — from damage to the kidney,
chiefly acute tubular necrosis from ischaemia or nephrotoxins;
and post-renal — from obstruction; a classification directing the diagnosis and
treatment, with pre-renal and ischaemic causes commonest in the perioperative
period.
Describe the effects of anaesthesia and surgery on renal function and the
principles of renal protection.
Anaesthesia and surgery affect renal function,
and the perioperative period carries a real risk of acute kidney injury,
so an understanding of these effects and of renal protection is important.
Several factors tend to reduce renal function perioperatively:
the reduction in renal blood flow from anaesthetic-induced hypotension,
from hypovolaemia, and from the sympathetic and hormonal stress response to
surgery, which activates the renin-angiotensin system and antidiuretic hormone,
reducing renal blood flow and promoting sodium and water retention;
positive-pressure ventilation, which reduces cardiac output and renal flow;
and nephrotoxic insults — drugs, contrast,
and the products of haemolysis or muscle breakdown.
These tend to reduce urine output and, if severe or prolonged,
cause acute kidney injury, especially in those with pre-existing renal impairment.
Renal protection rests not on any specific drug — none reliably protects — but on
maintaining renal perfusion: ensuring an adequate circulating volume and an
adequate blood pressure and cardiac output, avoiding hypovolaemia and hypotension,
and avoiding nephrotoxins.
So anaesthesia and surgery reduce renal function through hypotension, hypovolaemia,
the stress response activating the renin-angiotensin system and antidiuretic
hormone, positive-pressure ventilation and nephrotoxins,
risking acute kidney injury; renal protection resting chiefly on maintaining renal
perfusion — adequate volume, pressure and cardiac output — and avoiding
nephrotoxins, rather than on any protective drug — a central concern of
perioperative care.
Describe the renal handling of drugs and the implications of renal failure for drug
therapy.
The kidney is a major route for the elimination of drugs and their metabolites,
so renal function profoundly affects drug handling,
and renal failure has important implications for drug therapy,
including in anaesthesia.
Drugs are handled by the kidney by the same processes as endogenous substances:
filtration at the glomerulus, of the unbound drug;
secretion in the proximal tubule, by the organic acid and base transporters,
which handle many drugs; and reabsorption, particularly of lipid-soluble,
un-ionised drugs, which can be influenced by the urine pH — the basis of
manipulating urine pH to enhance the excretion of some poisons.
Water-soluble drugs and active or toxic metabolites are particularly dependent on
renal excretion.
In renal failure, the excretion of such drugs and metabolites is reduced,
so they accumulate, with a prolonged effect and a risk of toxicity,
unless the dose is reduced or the interval lengthened.
In anaesthesia, this is important for drugs and metabolites cleared by the kidney —
certain neuromuscular blocking drugs and their metabolites,
some opioids and their active metabolites,
and others — which may have a prolonged or exaggerated effect in renal failure.
So the kidney eliminates drugs by filtration,
tubular secretion and pH-dependent reabsorption; in renal failure,
renally-excreted drugs and active metabolites accumulate,
risking prolonged effects and toxicity,
requiring dose adjustment — important in anaesthesia for renally-cleared
neuromuscular blockers, opioids and their metabolites,
a key consideration in the patient with renal impairment.
Pull it together: summarise the applied renal physiology of importance to
anaesthesia.
I would draw the renal module to a close around the applications of renal
physiology that most concern the anaesthetist: the protection of the kidney,
the use of diuretics, the management of fluid and electrolyte and acid-base
disturbances, and the handling of drugs.
The kidney is vulnerable in the perioperative period,
its perfusion threatened by hypotension, hypovolaemia,
the stress response and nephrotoxins,
so its protection — by maintaining the circulating volume,
the blood pressure and the cardiac output,
and avoiding nephrotoxins — is a constant aim,
there being no specific protective drug.
The diuretics, understood by their sites of action along the nephron,
are used to manage fluid overload and their electrolyte effects anticipated.
The kidney's regulation of fluid volume, osmolality,
potassium and acid-base underlies the management of the fluid and electrolyte
disturbances so common in surgical patients,
and the recognition and correction of dangerous disturbances such as hyperkalaemia
before anaesthesia.
And the kidney's role in drug elimination requires the adjustment of
renally-cleared drugs in renal impairment.
So the applied renal physiology of anaesthesia centres on protecting the vulnerable
kidney by maintaining its perfusion,
using diuretics understood by their nephron sites, managing the fluid,
electrolyte and acid-base disturbances that the kidney regulates,
and adjusting renally-eliminated drugs in renal failure — the practical application
of renal physiology that safeguards the patient through the perioperative period.
Describe the osmotic diuretics and their uses.
The osmotic diuretics, of which mannitol is the principal example,
act in a manner quite different from the other diuretics,
by a physical osmotic effect rather than by inhibiting a specific transporter,
and they have particular uses that follow from this.
Mannitol is a small sugar that is freely filtered at the glomerulus but not
reabsorbed by the tubule; so it remains in the tubular fluid,
where its osmotic effect holds water,
opposing the reabsorption of water along the tubule and so producing a diuresis.
Because it acts throughout the water-permeable parts of the tubule,
and holds water osmotically, it produces a diuresis of water somewhat more than of
sodium. Its uses follow from its properties.
As it is filtered and holds water in the tubule,
it is used to maintain urine flow in some situations,
such as in the prevention of acute kidney injury in certain settings,
though the evidence is limited.
More importantly, before it is filtered,
mannitol remains in the plasma and the extracellular fluid as an osmotically-active
solute, drawing water out of the cells;
this is exploited to reduce the volume of the brain and to lower a raised
intracranial pressure, and to reduce intraocular pressure — its chief uses in
anaesthesia and neurosurgery.
A risk is a transient expansion of the circulating volume.
So the osmotic diuretics, chiefly mannitol, are filtered but not reabsorbed,
holding water osmotically in the tubule to produce a diuresis;
their main anaesthetic use being, through their osmotic effect in the plasma before
filtration, to draw water from the cells and reduce raised intracranial and
intraocular pressure — a distinct class with particular neurosurgical and
ophthalmic uses.
Describe the phases of acute tubular necrosis and the pattern of oliguria.
Acute tubular necrosis, the commonest cause of intrinsic acute kidney injury in the
perioperative period, classically passes through a series of phases,
an understanding of which helps in the recognition and management of the recovering
patient.
It results from damage to the tubular cells,
most often from prolonged ischaemia — a continuation of severe pre-renal
hypoperfusion — or from nephrotoxins. It classically has three phases.
The initiating phase is the period of the insult — the ischaemia or toxin — during
which the injury is established but may still be reversible if the cause is
corrected.
The maintenance phase follows, in which the kidney injury is established:
the glomerular filtration rate is low,
and there is usually oliguria — a reduced urine output — with the retention of
wastes, fluid, potassium and acid, lasting days to weeks;
this is the dangerous phase, requiring supportive management and sometimes dialysis.
The recovery phase follows as the tubular cells regenerate:
the filtration rate recovers, and there is often a polyuric phase,
in which a large volume of urine is produced as the recovering but still immature
tubules cannot yet concentrate or reabsorb adequately,
risking fluid and electrolyte depletion.
So acute tubular necrosis, from ischaemia or nephrotoxins,
passes through an initiating phase,
a maintenance phase of established injury with oliguria and the retention of wastes
and electrolytes, and a recovery phase often with a polyuria as the tubules
regenerate — phases guiding the recognition and supportive management of the injury
and its resolution.
How are pre-renal and intrinsic renal failure distinguished by the urine?
The distinction between pre-renal acute kidney injury and established intrinsic
injury, chiefly acute tubular necrosis,
is clinically important because their management differs,
and the urine provides valuable clues,
since the functioning kidney of pre-renal failure handles sodium and water
differently from the damaged kidney.
In pre-renal acute kidney injury, the kidney tissue is intact and responds
appropriately to the reduced perfusion by conserving salt and water:
so the urine is concentrated, with a high osmolality and a high specific gravity,
and is sodium-poor, with a low urinary sodium concentration and a low fractional
excretion of sodium — the proportion of the filtered sodium that is excreted being
low, as the kidney avidly reabsorbs sodium;
the urine-to-plasma ratios of urea and creatinine are high.
In established acute tubular necrosis,
the damaged tubules cannot conserve sodium or concentrate the urine:
so the urine is inappropriately dilute,
with an osmolality approaching that of plasma, and sodium-rich,
with a high urinary sodium and a high fractional excretion of sodium;
there may be tubular casts and cells.
The fractional excretion of sodium is the most useful single index.
So pre-renal failure gives a concentrated,
sodium-poor urine with a low fractional excretion of sodium,
as the intact kidney conserves salt and water,
whereas acute tubular necrosis gives a dilute,
sodium-rich urine with a high fractional excretion of sodium,
as the damaged tubules cannot conserve them — the urinary indices,
especially the fractional excretion of sodium,
distinguishing the two and guiding management.
Describe the anaesthetic considerations in the patient with chronic kidney disease.
The patient with chronic kidney disease presents a range of considerations for
anaesthesia, because the failing kidney affects fluid and electrolyte balance,
drug handling, and many other systems, requiring careful management.
The disturbances are wide.
Fluid and electrolyte balance is impaired,
with a tendency to fluid overload and to hyperkalaemia,
which must be checked and corrected before surgery, given its cardiac danger.
There is a metabolic acidosis. There is anaemia, from reduced erythropoietin.
There is a bleeding tendency, from platelet dysfunction.
Hypertension and cardiovascular disease are common and contribute to perioperative
cardiac risk. The renal excretion of drugs is impaired,
so renally-cleared drugs and active metabolites accumulate and must be adjusted.
Many patients are on dialysis, with considerations of its timing relative to
surgery, of vascular access to be protected,
and of the fluid and electrolyte shifts around it.
The further protection of any residual renal function,
by maintaining perfusion and avoiding nephrotoxins, is important.
So the patient with chronic kidney disease requires attention to fluid overload and
hyperkalaemia, metabolic acidosis, anaemia, a bleeding tendency,
and cardiovascular disease; to the adjustment of renally-excreted drugs; and,
in the dialysis patient, to the timing of dialysis, the protection of access,
and fluid shifts — along with the protection of residual function;
a multisystem challenge central to their safe anaesthesia.
Describe the handling of neuromuscular blocking drugs and opioids in renal failure.
Renal failure affects the handling of several drugs important in anaesthesia,
and the neuromuscular blocking drugs and the opioids are particularly significant
examples, because their accumulation can cause prolonged or dangerous effects,
requiring careful choice and dosing.
Among the neuromuscular blocking drugs,
those that depend on renal excretion accumulate in renal failure,
with a risk of prolonged paralysis;
so agents independent of renal excretion are preferred — notably atracurium and
cisatracurium, which are eliminated by Hofmann degradation,
a spontaneous breakdown in the plasma independent of organ function,
making them well suited to renal failure.
Suxamethonium can be used but raises the plasma potassium by around half a
millimole, which may be dangerous if the patient is already hyperkalaemic,
so the potassium must be checked.
Among the opioids, morphine is problematic because it has an active metabolite,
morphine-six-glucuronide, which is renally excreted and accumulates in renal
failure, causing prolonged sedation and respiratory depression;
so morphine is used cautiously, and alternatives with inactive metabolites,
or those titrated carefully, are preferred.
Many other drugs and their metabolites are similarly affected.
So in renal failure the renally-excreted neuromuscular blockers accumulate,
so atracurium and cisatracurium, cleared by organ-independent Hofmann degradation,
are preferred, and suxamethonium's rise in potassium must be respected;
and morphine's renally-excreted active metabolite accumulates,
causing prolonged effects, so opioids are chosen and dosed with care — key
considerations in the anaesthesia of the patient with renal failure.
Describe the value and limitations of urine output as a perioperative monitor.
The urine output is widely monitored during and after major surgery as an indicator
of the adequacy of the circulation and of renal perfusion, and although useful,
it has limitations that must be understood to interpret it correctly.
The rationale is that, since the formation of urine depends on an adequate renal
perfusion and filtration, an adequate urine output is taken as a sign that the
kidney, and by extension the circulation, is adequately perfused,
while oliguria — a low urine output — may be an early warning of hypovolaemia or
hypoperfusion, prompting attention to the circulating volume.
It is a simple, continuous and non-invasive measure.
However, its limitations are considerable.
A low urine output is not always due to hypovolaemia:
it is a normal response to the stress of surgery,
mediated by antidiuretic hormone and the renin-angiotensin system,
which conserve water and sodium, so a degree of oliguria is expected and does not
necessarily indicate inadequate filling.
Conversely, a normal or high urine output does not guarantee adequate perfusion,
as in the polyuric phase of recovering injury or with diuretics or osmotic loads.
So the urine output must be interpreted in context, not in isolation,
and not over-treated with fluid.
So the urine output is a simple, continuous monitor of renal perfusion and of the
circulation, oliguria warning of possible hypovolaemia; but it is limited,
since the surgical stress response normally reduces it,
and a normal output does not guarantee adequate perfusion — so it must be
interpreted in clinical context and not, by itself,
drive excessive fluid administration.
Describe diuretic resistance and the braking phenomenon.
The response to diuretics is often limited by the development of resistance and by
compensatory mechanisms, an understanding of which is important in the management
of oedematous states such as heart failure.
Several mechanisms limit the diuretic response.
The braking phenomenon is the diminishing response to repeated doses of a diuretic:
after a dose causes a natriuresis, the resulting volume contraction and
neurohormonal activation — the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and sympathetic
systems — cause increased sodium reabsorption between doses,
so that sodium balance is re-established and the net effect blunted.
Beyond this, true diuretic resistance develops in chronic use and in disease:
the nephron segments downstream of the diuretic's site of action hypertrophy and
increase their reabsorptive capacity,
so that the extra sodium delivered by the diuretic is reabsorbed downstream — for a
loop diuretic, the distal tubule adapts and reabsorbs more.
Resistance is also caused by a reduced delivery of the diuretic to its luminal site
of action, as in renal impairment or hypoalbuminaemia,
and by poor adherence or excessive sodium intake.
The approaches to resistance include giving the diuretic in adequate and
appropriately timed doses, restricting sodium,
and combining diuretics acting at different sites — a loop diuretic with a thiazide
— to block the downstream adaptation, a sequential nephron blockade.
So the diuretic response is limited by the braking phenomenon — the neurohormonal
compensation between doses — and by true resistance from the hypertrophy and
increased reabsorption of downstream segments, reduced drug delivery,
and excess sodium intake; managed by adequate dosing, sodium restriction,
and combining diuretics at different nephron sites — important in the treatment of
resistant oedema.
Describe the transurethral resection syndrome.
The transurethral resection syndrome is a specific and potentially serious
complication of transurethral surgery,
classically transurethral resection of the prostate,
arising from the absorption of irrigating fluid,
and it is an instructive disturbance of fluid and electrolyte balance of importance
to the anaesthetist.
During transurethral resection, the operative field is irrigated with large volumes
of fluid under pressure; when venous sinuses are opened during the resection,
this irrigating fluid can be absorbed into the circulation,
sometimes in large volumes.
The classical syndrome arose with the use of hypotonic,
electrolyte-free irrigating fluids, such as glycine,
used because they do not conduct the diathermy current.
The absorption of a large volume of this fluid causes, first,
a circulatory overload from the volume; and, second, and characteristically,
a dilutional hyponatraemia, as the electrolyte-free fluid dilutes the plasma
sodium, which can cause cerebral oedema with confusion, visual disturbance,
fits and coma; the absorbed glycine and its metabolites, including ammonia,
may contribute neurological and visual effects.
The features include cardiovascular and neurological disturbances.
It is prevented by limiting the resection time and the irrigation pressure,
and increasingly by using isotonic irrigants with modern bipolar techniques;
and managed by recognising it, supporting the circulation,
and cautiously correcting the hyponatraemia.
So the transurethral resection syndrome results from the absorption of large
volumes of hypotonic irrigating fluid through opened venous sinuses,
causing circulatory overload and a dilutional hyponatraemia with cerebral oedema,
and effects of the absorbed solute;
prevented by limiting resection time and pressure and using isotonic irrigants,
and managed by support and careful correction of the sodium — a disturbance of
fluid balance important in transurethral surgery.
Describe rhabdomyolysis and the renal injury it causes.
Rhabdomyolysis is the breakdown of skeletal muscle with the release of its contents
into the circulation, and it is an important cause of acute kidney injury,
the mechanism of which follows from the toxic effects of the released myoglobin,
of relevance in trauma, prolonged immobility and certain anaesthetic emergencies.
When muscle is damaged — by crush injury, prolonged immobility or pressure,
ischaemia, severe exertion, certain drugs and toxins,
or the hypermetabolic muscle damage of malignant hyperthermia — it releases its
contents, including myoglobin, potassium, phosphate, and creatine kinase.
The myoglobin is the principal cause of the renal injury, by several mechanisms:
it is filtered and can precipitate in the tubules, obstructing them,
particularly in acid urine; it causes renal vasoconstriction;
and it has a direct toxic effect on the tubular cells,
partly through iron and oxidative injury.
The result is an acute kidney injury, an acute tubular necrosis,
worsened by the hypovolaemia that often accompanies the muscle injury.
There are additional dangers: a dangerous hyperkalaemia from the released
potassium, especially with the renal failure; and hypocalcaemia.
The management centres on early and vigorous fluid resuscitation to maintain renal
perfusion and a high urine flow, flushing the tubules,
with treatment of the hyperkalaemia and the cause.
So rhabdomyolysis is muscle breakdown releasing myoglobin,
potassium and other contents; the myoglobin causing acute kidney injury by tubular
obstruction, vasoconstriction and direct toxicity, worsened by hypovolaemia,
with a dangerous hyperkalaemia; managed by early vigorous fluid resuscitation to
maintain urine flow and by treating the hyperkalaemia — an important cause of acute
kidney injury in trauma, immobility and malignant hyperthermia.
Describe renal replacement therapy and its indications.
Renal replacement therapy is the artificial replacement of the excretory function
of the kidney, used in severe acute kidney injury and in established renal failure,
and an outline of its principles, modalities and indications is useful,
as the anaesthetist cares for patients receiving it.
The principle is to remove waste products and excess fluid and to correct
electrolyte and acid-base disturbances,
by passing the blood across a semipermeable membrane against which a dialysis fluid
is run or through which fluid is filtered.
The mechanisms are diffusion — solutes diffusing across the membrane down their
concentration gradients, as in haemodialysis — and convection — solutes carried
with a bulk filtration of fluid, as in haemofiltration.
The modalities include intermittent haemodialysis,
efficient and used for chronic dialysis and stable patients;
the continuous renal replacement therapies, slower and gentler,
used in the critically ill and haemodynamically unstable; and peritoneal dialysis,
using the peritoneum as the membrane.
The indications, remembered as a group,
are the dangerous consequences of renal failure refractory to other treatment:
severe fluid overload, a refractory hyperkalaemia, a severe metabolic acidosis,
the uraemic complications such as pericarditis and encephalopathy,
and certain poisonings.
So renal replacement therapy replaces the kidney's excretory function by removing
solutes and fluid across a membrane,
by diffusion in haemodialysis and convection in haemofiltration, in intermittent,
continuous or peritoneal modalities; indicated for the dangerous,
refractory consequences of renal failure — severe fluid overload,
refractory hyperkalaemia, severe acidosis, uraemic complications,
and some poisonings — the support of the failing kidney.
Describe the abdominal compartment syndrome and its effect on the kidney.
The abdominal compartment syndrome is the organ dysfunction caused by a sustained,
marked rise in the pressure within the abdominal cavity,
and the kidney is one of the organs most affected,
an effect that follows from the principles of renal perfusion we have discussed,
and that is increasingly recognised in the critically ill.
The intra-abdominal pressure may rise markedly — from bleeding,
oedema of the bowel and tissues, ascites,
or the effects of massive fluid resuscitation — and a sustained,
severe rise causes dysfunction of multiple organs.
The kidney is affected by two mechanisms relating to its perfusion.
First, the raised abdominal pressure compresses the renal veins and raises the
renal venous pressure, which, as we have discussed,
reduces the pressure gradient across the kidney and impairs filtration — the venous
mechanism being particularly important.
Second, the raised pressure reduces the cardiac output, by impeding venous return,
and may directly compress the renal arteries and parenchyma,
reducing the arterial perfusion.
The result is a reduction in renal blood flow and filtration,
causing oliguria and acute kidney injury, often an early sign of the syndrome.
The management is to recognise it, to measure the intra-abdominal pressure,
and to relieve it, by medical measures or, if severe, by surgical decompression.
So the abdominal compartment syndrome,
a marked sustained rise in intra-abdominal pressure,
impairs renal function by raising the renal venous pressure and reducing the
pressure gradient across the kidney,
and by reducing cardiac output and arterial perfusion — causing oliguria and acute
kidney injury, often early; managed by recognising and relieving the raised
pressure — an important and reversible cause of renal dysfunction in the critically
ill.
Describe the anaemia of chronic kidney disease and its management.
The anaemia of chronic kidney disease is a characteristic and important consequence
of renal failure, following directly from the loss of an endocrine function of the
kidney, and its understanding and management are relevant to the care of these
patients, including before surgery.
The principal cause is the loss of the kidney's production of erythropoietin,
the hormone that stimulates red cell production in the bone marrow;
as the functioning renal tissue is lost, erythropoietin production falls,
so red cell production is inadequate and an anaemia develops.
Other factors contribute: a shortened red cell survival in the uraemic environment;
iron deficiency, from poor absorption,
blood loss and the effects of inflammation on iron handling;
and the effects of the uraemic state on the marrow.
The anaemia is typically normochromic and normocytic.
It contributes to the symptoms and to the cardiovascular burden of chronic kidney
disease, and it reduces the reserve for surgery.
The management rests on the administration of erythropoiesis-stimulating agents —
synthetic erythropoietin and its analogues — which correct the deficiency of the
hormone, together with the provision of adequate iron;
the target haemoglobin is moderate,
since full correction has been associated with harm.
So the anaemia of chronic kidney disease results chiefly from the loss of renal
erythropoietin production, with contributions from reduced red cell survival,
iron deficiency and the uraemic marrow;
a normochromic normocytic anaemia managed by erythropoiesis-stimulating agents and
iron, to a moderate target — a consequence of the loss of a renal endocrine
function, important in the care and the perioperative optimisation of these
patients.
Describe renal bone disease and the disturbance of mineral metabolism in chronic
kidney disease.
Chronic kidney disease causes a complex disturbance of mineral metabolism and bone,
following from the loss of the renal regulation of calcium,
phosphate and vitamin D, and an outline is worth giving,
as it is a major complication of renal failure. Several disturbances combine.
The failing kidney cannot excrete phosphate adequately, so phosphate is retained,
raising the plasma phosphate.
It cannot perform the activation of vitamin D,
so the level of active vitamin D falls,
reducing the intestinal absorption of calcium and tending to lower the plasma
calcium.
The low calcium, the high phosphate,
and the low vitamin D all stimulate the parathyroid glands,
causing a secondary hyperparathyroidism, with a raised parathyroid hormone;
over time the glands may become autonomous.
The raised parathyroid hormone, acting on the bone,
together with the disordered calcium, phosphate and vitamin D,
causes the bone disease — a mixture of the effects of excess parathyroid hormone
and of defective mineralisation.
There is also a tendency to vascular and soft-tissue calcification from the
disturbed calcium and phosphate. This whole disorder is termed the
chronic-kidney-disease mineral and bone disorder.
Its management includes controlling the phosphate with dietary restriction and
phosphate binders, giving active vitamin D, and managing the hyperparathyroidism.
So renal bone disease arises from the loss of renal phosphate excretion and vitamin
D activation, causing phosphate retention, reduced calcium absorption,
and a secondary hyperparathyroidism that, with the disordered minerals,
damages the bone and calcifies the vessels — the chronic-kidney-disease mineral and
bone disorder; managed by controlling phosphate,
giving vitamin D and treating the hyperparathyroidism — a major complication
following from the loss of renal mineral regulation.
Describe the nephrotoxic drugs and the principles of avoiding drug-induced renal
injury.
A number of drugs can injure the kidney,
and drug-induced renal injury is a common and often preventable cause of acute
kidney injury, so an awareness of the nephrotoxic drugs and of the principles of
avoiding harm is important, particularly perioperatively.
The drugs injure the kidney by various mechanisms.
Some reduce the renal perfusion: the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
by inhibiting the protective vasodilator prostaglandins,
and the inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system,
by removing the efferent tone that maintains filtration — both particularly harmful
in the volume-depleted.
Some are directly toxic to the tubular cells: the aminoglycoside antibiotics,
the antifungal amphotericin, certain chemotherapy agents such as cisplatin,
and radiographic contrast.
Some cause an interstitial nephritis, an allergic-type reaction,
as with some antibiotics and proton-pump inhibitors.
Some cause crystal or obstructive injury.
The principles of avoiding harm are:
to be aware of the nephrotoxic potential of drugs and to avoid them where possible
in those at risk; to maintain an adequate circulating volume and renal perfusion,
since volume depletion greatly increases the risk;
to avoid combinations of nephrotoxins;
to adjust doses and monitor levels of those that are both nephrotoxic and renally
excreted; and to monitor renal function.
So nephrotoxic drugs injure the kidney by reducing perfusion — the non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs and renin-angiotensin inhibitors — by direct tubular
toxicity — aminoglycosides, amphotericin,
cisplatin and contrast — or by interstitial nephritis;
the harm avoided by awareness, by maintaining volume and perfusion,
by avoiding combinations, and by dose adjustment and monitoring — a common and
preventable cause of acute kidney injury, important in perioperative care.
Describe the biomarkers and assessment of acute kidney injury.
The recognition and assessment of acute kidney injury rest chiefly on the
conventional markers of renal function, with their limitations,
and there is interest in newer biomarkers that detect injury earlier,
an outline of which is useful in the context of the critically ill and surgical
patient.
The conventional assessment uses the plasma creatinine and the urine output,
and acute kidney injury is formally defined and staged by a rise in the plasma
creatinine, or a fall in the urine output, over defined periods.
These have limitations: the creatinine rises only after the filtration rate has
already fallen substantially, and after a delay, so it is a late marker of injury;
and the urine output, as discussed, is non-specific.
The creatinine is also affected by muscle mass, dilution and other factors.
Because of these limitations, there is interest in newer biomarkers that may detect
renal injury earlier, before the creatinine rises — markers released by the damaged
tubular cells, which rise early after injury;
these are increasingly studied and used to identify injury and risk earlier,
though their role is still being defined.
The assessment also includes the urinary indices distinguishing pre-renal from
established injury, the examination of the urine,
and imaging to exclude obstruction.
So acute kidney injury is assessed chiefly by the plasma creatinine and the urine
output — which define and stage it but are late and non-specific markers —
supplemented by urinary indices, urine examination and imaging;
with newer biomarkers of tubular injury offering earlier detection,
their role still being defined — the assessment of a common and important
condition, where earlier recognition may allow earlier intervention.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Diuretics increase sodium (and so water) excretion,
classified by nephron site: carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide, proximal,
weak), osmotic (mannitol, throughout), loop (furosemide, thick ascending limb,
most powerful), thiazides (bendroflumethiazide, early distal),
and potassium-sparing (amiloride blocks the Na channel;
spironolactone antagonises aldosterone; collecting duct, weak but spare potassium).
Second, Loop diuretics inhibit the Na-K-2Cl co-transporter of the thick ascending
limb, powerfully reducing sodium reabsorption AND abolishing the medullary gradient
(impairing concentration) — a large diuresis, with loss of K+, H+,
calcium and magnesium (tending to hypokalaemia and alkalosis).
Thiazides (distal Na-Cl co-transporter) reduce calcium excretion;
K-sparing drugs spare potassium; carbonic anhydrase inhibitors cause acidosis (used
in glaucoma/altitude); osmotic diuretics reduce intracranial/intraocular pressure.
Third, Acute kidney injury (sudden decline in renal function) is classified as
pre-renal (inadequate perfusion — hypovolaemia/hypotension/low output;
reversible if corrected, kidney makes concentrated sodium-poor urine),
intrinsic renal (kidney damage — chiefly acute tubular necrosis from ischaemia or
nephrotoxins), or post-renal (obstruction);
pre-renal and ischaemic causes are commonest perioperatively.
Fourth, Anaesthesia/surgery reduce renal function via hypotension, hypovolaemia,
the stress response (renin-angiotensin and ADH),
positive-pressure ventilation and nephrotoxins, risking AKI.
Renal protection rests on maintaining perfusion (adequate volume, pressure,
cardiac output) and avoiding nephrotoxins — NOT on any specific protective drug.
Fifth, The kidney eliminates drugs by filtration,
tubular secretion and pH-dependent reabsorption; in renal failure,
renally-excreted drugs and active metabolites accumulate (prolonged effect,
toxicity) — requiring dose adjustment,
important for renally-cleared neuromuscular blockers,
opioids and their active metabolites in anaesthesia.
Thank you. That concludes the station.